This is where [music]
you accepted the Nobel.
>> Yes.
>> Like right here.
>> Right here.
>> Tell me about that moment.
>> Well, it was in the heart of the
pandemic
>> [music]
>> and normally it's done in Stockholm,
Sweden.
And so the Nobel Committee said, "Well,
we're going to send the Nobel to you and
we're going to give it to you in your
garden."
>> [applause]
>> When you wake up the next day, does the
world just open up
>> [music]
>> or do you feel a weight of
responsibility?
>> If I'm honest, I mean, it was so
overwhelming. I didn't go into science
with any [music] thoughts of winning
prizes, believe me. You know, I just
hoped I could get a job someday. My
husband said to me, "Well, now your main
job is being an ambassador for science."
I thought, "How do I do that?"
>> [laughter]
>> Being [music] the face of a scientific
revolution is a lot of pressure, even
for Jennifer Doudna, a legend in biology
who helped turn CRISPR into a
breakthrough method for altering DNA,
tackling everything from genetic disease
to climate [music] change and spawning
dozens of companies in the process. But
some critics claim the tech [music]
hasn't lived up to its hype just yet,
not to mention the ethical concerns.
At the same time, movie depictions of
biotechnology [music]
haven't exactly been great PR for gene
editing.
>> More human than human is our motto. It
didn't matter how much I lied.
>> [music]
>> My real resume was in my cells.
>> So, to get to the real story, I went to
Berkeley, California to meet with
Professor [music]
Doudna to talk about where CRISPR is
actually headed.
>> I do have a sense that over the next 3
years, we're going to see some continued
breakthroughs.
>> To parse through fact versus fiction in
the AI race,
>> I'm not seeing chatbots in our own
experience innovating. [music]
>> And to gauge how excited or worried we
should be. So, do you feel a sense
[music] of urgency?
>> Oh, yeah. Every day. Yeah.
>> So, this is your famous garden.
>> Well, such as it is, yeah.
>> How much time do you spend back here?
>> Not enough is the is the answer, but
I love being in my garden, Emily,
because it's a way I refresh my mind.
It's amazing how when I come up here and
I'm even if I'm just pulling weeds, I
feel connected to nature in a way that I
find very relaxing.
>> Doudna's Nobel origin story began in the
rainy town of Hilo, Hawaii, where her
family moved when she was seven. [music]
>> What inspired you there when you were
growing up?
>> Well, let's just start with nobody in my
family was a scientist. I haven't found
a single scientist [music] on either
side of my family, but I remember how
fascinated I was with just the beauty
[music] of the place and I think that
was one of the things that first got me
interested in science was thinking
[music] about why, you know, different
plants and animals were able to survive
there and thrive there.
>> When she's not untangling life's biggest
questions in her backyard, Doudna is
teaching, running a lab, mentoring young
scientists, and advising startups
looking to turn her life's work into
real-world cures.
Today, she took us inside the Innovative
Genomics Institute, a research [music]
hub she founded that's part breakthrough
lab, part startup incubator.
>> It's fun, right?
>> Yeah.
>> I still kind of get chills when I come
in the lab, you know, I I love the feel
of it. I mean, I still remember my first
time going into a research lab and
feeling the sense of wonder, you know,
kind of the sense of discoveries being
made here and wanting to be [music] part
of it.
>> I can't believe I never realized this,
but it was pointed out to me that your
name
literally spells do you DNA.
I mean, that has to be fate, right?
>> to be fate, right? I had to work on
this.
>> So, what kind of research is happening
right now?
>> We've got all kinds of work going on.
We're doing some very fundamental
science trying to figure out the
original ancestral origins of CRISPR in
bacteria, which is where it comes from.
I'm really excited about all the
students and and post-doctoral trainees
that are here that are doing really
creative, interesting science. I can't
tell you how many times they come up
with ideas that I would have never
thought of. So, recently, a person in my
lab figured out that he could extend the
efficiency of CRISPR in a whole
organism. He's doing experiments in a
mouse model of disease by simply
accelerating the pace at which CRISPR
molecules are able to edit cells.
>> Wait. Let's pause here for a moment.
CRISPR. We've been talking about it, but
we should probably explain exactly what
it is and how it works, right? Okay. The
discovery began with Doudna and her
collaborator Emmanuelle Charpentier and
their obsession with the remarkably
adaptive immune system inside bacteria.
When a virus attacks a bacterium, the
defending cell saves a fragment of the
viral DNA and turns it into guide RNA,
which is like a tiny genetic GPS.
If the virus returns, a protein called
Cas9, kind of like molecular scissors,
pairs with the RNA GPS, then locates and
cuts the invading virus. The
breakthrough from Doudna and Charpentier
was realizing this guide RNA GPS could
be reprogrammed, directing Cas9 scissors
to cut genomic sequences beyond viral
DNA, including human cells. Suddenly,
editing DNA was no longer theoretical,
and over time, Doudna launched a bevy of
biotech companies out of IGI, all
working in different ways to translate
CRISPR technology into treatments for
patients.
>> Give us a sense of, the scope of, you
know, the number of companies and new
ventures that have come out of IGI.
>> So, from the very beginning of the
institute, one of our goals was to
ensure that we had a pretty smooth
pipeline between fundamental discoveries
and um the kind of organizations, like
startup companies, that would be able to
build real-world value around those
discoveries. I think we've now spun out
31 companies at last count, $9 billion
valuation if you add it all up, over
2,500 jobs created largely here in
California, but elsewhere, too. It's
It's really extraordinary.
>> Long before founding IGI, Doudna had
spent years studying RNA at Harvard and
Yale, but it wasn't until 2006 at UC
[music] Berkeley that she turned her
attention to CRISPR.
>> Were there nights that you couldn't
sleep because you felt you were close to
something?
>> Oh, yeah. It had that kind of detective
story feel to it, you know, when you're
hot on the trail of something, you know
that it's very exciting, can't wait to
do the next experiment. CRISPR was very
much that way.
>> What are the current use cases that
inspire you the most?
>> Well, I always think about Victoria
Gray, who was the first patient with
sickle cell disease to be treated with
CRISPR here in the US.
Her story is so inspiring.
>> Victoria Gray, an activist and lecturer,
is the first person with sickle cell
disease to receive an experimental
treatment using CRISPR.
>> I want to reach others who feel like no
help is coming.
We're coming.
>> Do you have patients reaching out to you
all the time?
>> All the time.
>> So, you're getting a lot of calls.
>> We do. Yeah. I'll just say that I I
always um thank people for reaching out
because they're often sharing very
personal stories. They're talk A lot of
them are about children, you know, their
kids. A lot of people will send pictures
of their children. It really brings home
the importance of what we're doing and
frankly the need to work as fast as
possible on real therapies that can
benefit people.
>> So, do you feel a sense of urgency?
>> Oh, yeah. Every day. Yeah.
>> Because every day that passes, you could
be coming up with a miracle cure or
saving someone's child.
>> just realizing that there's still a big
divide between the kind of work that
goes on in a lab like this where we're
making fundamental discoveries and
actually taking that knowledge and
having it benefit people in a real
sense. There's a big gap there.
>> So far, CRISPR therapies, like those for
sickle cell, have been built to treat
entire groups of patients with the same
genetic disease. [music]
But in 2025, a new milestone was
achieved at the Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, when an infant, known as
baby KJ, became the first patient to
receive a fully personalized
CRISPR-based gene therapy.
>> He was born on Thursday, Friday morning,
they had said to me, "Your son is very
sick."
>> In patients who have urea cycle
disorders, they can't break down
protein. And what happens is ammonia
builds up, and ammonia can be toxic to
the [music] brain.
>> We didn't know that we were going to
reach his first birthday.
Now we're seeing him crawl.
Now he's walking. Now he climbs on
everything under the sun and thinks he's
>> [music]
>> the most funny person in the room.
>> Baby KJ's treatment shows a glimpse of
what's possible, but the therapy came
with a price tag of [music] around
$800,000,
supported by a patchwork of public
research funding, academic
collaboration, and philanthropy. [music]
>> How's baby KJ doing?
>> My understanding is that he's doing
great. You know, he's continuing to
grow, he's continuing to benefit from
the the CRISPR treatment that he
received. It's an extraordinary story.
>> So how do we save more baby KJs?
>> Right. That's the question, right? It
can't be a path that costs millions of
dollars. It can't be a path that takes a
huge army of of people and time to
achieve. I'd really like to see a world
where we can diagnose people quite
quickly who have rare disease,
quickly figure out if they might be a
good candidate for a genetic therapy
like CRISPR, and if the answer is yes,
then have a very smooth pipeline for
making the CRISPR therapy, testing it
quickly, and then getting it into the
patient.
>> One way CRISPR research may accelerate
is with artificial intelligence, which
could theoretically help scientists
design edits faster and and their risks
more accurately.
That promise has already piqued the
interest of Silicon Valley.
>> A huge fraction of ChatGPT queries are
health-related, so we wanted to get
really good at this.
>> One day, maybe we can cure all disease
with the help of AI.
>> It'll look like there's a human
professor and a thousand AI grad
students, and [music] they're smarter
than you are, by the way.
>> Doudna is less gung-ho on the matter.
>> Biology's hard. That's all.
>> [laughter]
>> I guess it really comes down to that.
Now, I've been working in in this area
for a long time as a biologist, and the
more I learn, honestly, the more I'm
really humbled by the fact that, you
know, biology is complex.
We're not going to be able to simulate
our way to an understanding of the human
body. We're not going to be able to
avoid the need for certain types of
testing. I do think there are
opportunities to increase the efficiency
in which we make uh discoveries about
the way our bodies work and the way they
interact with drugs that will be
effective, and I think AI will be
helpful there. But, it's going to come
down to training models on the right
kind of data, and our big need for
better and more uh data for training
models if we want to achieve that.
>> An OpenAI executive recently suggested
that if a discovery happens on ChatGPT,
let's say a drug discovery, that OpenAI
should get a cut of sales. What do you
think of that?
>> [laughter]
>> Good luck.
>> Expand.
>> How are chatbots going to change drug
discovery? I'm not sure the answer to
that yet. I don't know. Lots of people
are, of course, very very hopeful, some
very hypeful about it. Uh but, I think
that innovation is still really in the
domain of human beings right now. I'm
not seeing chatbots in our own
experience uh innovating. They can be
helpful with summarizing data, they can
be helpful in writing reports and things
of that nature, but I'm not seeing
chatbots uh coming up with a brand new
idea for something that nobody else ever
thought of.
>> So, you're saying AI can't innovate?
>> I don't know if it can't innovate, I
just don't think it is right now.
>> What about after the AGI moment?
>> Well, I never say never, so maybe
that'll happen, but I'm not holding my
breath.
>> Well, there are just so many big
promises out there like Larry Ellison
saying AI will cure cancer in a 48-hour
window. Does that hold any water?
>> Believe me, I'd be overjoyed if that is
true, but I just I don't see it right
now.
>> [music]
>> Doudna's mission is to turn CRISPR from
a scientific breakthrough into
real-world medicine, but commercializing
gene editing means delivering those
edits to the right cells safely,
reliably, and at scale. [music]
>> So, CRISPR was supposed to usher in this
era of miracle cures, and we've seen
some, but was the promise overstated or
are we just early?
>> I think it's a classic example of you
know, this happens a lot in in human
nature, you know, we get very excited
about something, a discovery or a
breakthrough of some kind,
and you start imagining all the
possibilities with it,
and then as you start to to dig in, you
realize that you know, there's still
some challenges.
I mean, think about the human genome
being sequenced back around the year
2000.
Now we're in 2026, so we're 26 years
from that moment, and yet honestly, we
still don't understand the function of
about 40% of the genes in a typical
bacterial cell
with a much smaller genome than the
human genome.
That just gives you a little bit of a
sense of the complexity. We recognize
that it's a very powerful technology,
but it has limitations that have become
clear over time.
>> What are the limitations that still
exist?
>> A lot of it has to do with the way that
we put CRISPR molecules into patients.
Right now it's being done mostly by
therapies that are strategies that
involve taking cells out of the patient,
editing them in the lab, and then
transplanting them back in, and you can
imagine that's quite involved, it's
quite expensive, it's unpleasant for
patients, you know, it's not ideal. So,
I think going forward, increasingly
there are efforts to turn CRISPR into
what we call an in vivo therapy or
therapeutic where we can deliver it
directly into the patient's body in a
way that will take these editing
molecules to the right cells where they
do their job and then don't do anything
else.
>> Is there a time horizon that you like to
look at in terms of when, I don't know,
they'll there will be some sort of
feeling that
the sky has been the limit?
>> It's always hard to
put a timeline on things. I do have a
sense that over the next 3 years, we're
going to see some continued
breakthroughs.
>> Two, three years isn't isn't too far
away.
>> Not too far away.
>> So, what happens in two, three years?
>> For one thing, I hope that we're able to
treat more patients like KJ and provide
a path for others. We'd like to get more
medical centers involved in this type of
an approach. We'd like to drive down the
cost, of course, partnering with
manufacturers that can make the
molecules we need more inexpensively and
really just getting more clinical teams
involved in this effort. I think if that
can be done, then there's really going
to be a path to opening the door for
many more rare diseases to be treated.
>> But, these large-scale efforts require
hefty resources.
And over the past year, federal funding
cuts under the Trump [music]
administration have created significant
uncertainty for long-term scientific
research.
Over the past 3 years, the number of new
grants from the NSF dropped 24%
and roughly 25,000 [music]
scientists and staff, about 20% of the
workforce, have left federal research
agencies.
>> We're a year into the [music] Trump
administration. A number of grants have
been cut.
>> How does science [music] fare in the age
of President Trump?
>> We're seeing it real real challenges
right now. As you just mentioned, you
know, I think the the cuts that we've
seen really risk the economic success of
the United States in in science and
technology in a way that is to me very
unfortunate. We've been a leader in
science since the Second World War. And
every dollar that's been invested from
the NIH in research leads to about $2.50
of economic benefit. That's a pretty
darn good return on investment. So,
giving that up, I think seeding that to
other countries because they will they
will step in. You know, there there are
opportunities there if we don't continue
our investment in science, others will
do so.
I think that would really be a shame.
>> But the Trump administration's impact on
science goes way beyond these cuts.
[music]
>> What do you think of the Maha movement?
Is it going to really make Americans
healthier?
Or something else?
>> [music]
>> Look, I think, you know, health
decisions need to be made based on data
and based on science. And there's a
reason why people train in medical
schools or they go to graduate school to
learn about how to evaluate science or
to evaluate clinical data or to work
with patients. And I think we have to
lean into that when we make health
decisions.
>> Mhm. Do you know RFK Jr.?
>> I don't.
>> If you had an audience with him, what
would you say?
>> I'd say what I just said to you.
>> What are your concerns about where this
leads? It's you know, there's the Maha
movement, there's the anti-vax movement.
Coming from somebody who worked on RNA,
which was a key to the COVID vaccine.
>> It's a dangerous moment. It's very
dangerous. I mean, when I see things
like measles outbreak in South Carolina,
it's terrible. It doesn't have to be
that way.
>> When you're in a room alone with
scientists, you know, what do you
privately discuss? Like, what are people
saying about this moment?
>> Well, I think there's a lot of concern.
I think that um many of us feel uh if
I'm honest, also a sense of
responsibility that we need to be better
at communicating the value of our work,
why it's publicly funded, why should
taxpayer dollars be used for research,
what's the value of what we do. And um
there's incredible value, but we haven't
maybe been very good as a community at
communicating that to people that are
not scientists. Does it ever make you
want to scream?
>> Yes, but you know, then Emily, I look
around and I think, you know, I work at
an incredible place and I feel also
incredibly grateful.
>> We talked a bit about biotech funding.
[music] Researchers say they're
considering leaving the United States.
What are the implications of this? Does
China surge ahead?
>> I think it maybe does.
>> At least initially. [music]
>> I think that's a possibility. I think
it's a very real possibility.
Uh because at the same time that the
United States is pulling back on
funding, we're seeing a, you know, a big
investment in science in in China.
>> Over the past decade, China's biotech
[music] industry has rapidly
accelerated, propelled by state-backed
investment and a streamlined path for
human trials. In 2018, amid this climb,
a scientist based in Shenzhen conducted
a widely condemned gene-editing
experiment. [music]
>> researcher has created an international
controversy after claiming he helped
make the world's first genetically
[music] edited babies.
>> The procedure raised fears of a new era
of designer babies with parents
selecting traits for their children, a
possibility that remains largely
theoretical.
Although maybe not for long.
>> You said we'll see CRISPR-edited babies
within 25 years.
What kind of edits?
And who are these babies?
>> Those decisions are going to be made by
a lot of the people who are coming of
age and and coming into their
reproductive years, I think. Because
it'll be a question of assuming that we
get to a point where the technology is
actually safe and effective for that
kind of purpose.
Then asking, what kinds of edits should
we make? And who should have access to
that technology? Who should be paying
for that technology? Who should be
regulating that technology? Those
questions really haven't been answered
at this stage.
>> I know people of reproductive age now
and thinking about some of these things.
>> The companies that are promising they
can select embryos for traits like
intelligence and other things.
>> It's part of what's been called a
Silicon Valley push to breed super
babies.
>> We look at something like height, even
eye color, hair color, intelligence.
Intelligence.
>> What's actually possible now and what's
not possible? Because aren't these
traits that are controlled [music] by
thousands of genes?
>> Yes.
>> [laughter]
>> So, I agree. I think it's I think it's
it's a tall order to be able to do that
kind of selection in an in vitro
fertilization clinic. It's also, you
know, likewise going to be very hard to
know which sets of genes would need to
be edited to give you a an outcome that
affected the intelligence or something
as complex as that. So, I just don't see
it anytime soon.
>> There's this concern, if you select for
one trait, let's say intelligence, that
you might also end up
getting a lot of undesirable traits.
>> Well, you know, that you're touching on
something that I think about a lot. You
know, all the genes in our cells are
interacting with each other in ways that
we mostly aren't aware of and don't
understand yet. And that means that if
we tweak one gene or even a few, we
can't always be sure what the outcome is
going to be, especially if we're looking
long into the future. So, I think that's
going to continue to be an area where we
need to do research. You know, clearly
that work is still at a very early
stage. They're working in mice and you
know, they're working in in systems
that, you know, they haven't gotten to
the complexity of a human body yet.
>> So, let's say
it becomes increasingly possible. On
what grounds can we tell parents you
can't do this?
>> Like why wouldn't you want to
engineer babies to be as healthy as
possible?
>> Some people might say, well, I'd like to
edit out the sickle cell trait, which,
you know, I think one could make a very
good argument for wanting to do that. On
the other hand, if a parent said I want
to, you know, change uh something about
eye color or height or musculature, you
know, that
you know, some people might feel that
it's not appropriate. In the end, I
think it's going to come down to
probably um putting
applications of CRISPR into different
buckets, you know, where we could
imagine one bucket would be for diseases
that are devastating, where we have a
very well-defined genetic cause and a
clear way to make the targeted change in
the genome that would prevent that with
CRISPR
>> [snorts]
>> versus other things that have a lot of
risk associated with them, where you
might need to be changing many sets of
genes that, as you said, would
potentially lead to unintended
consequences.
>> [music]
>> You've been called the moral compass of
biotech.
Does that ever feel more like a burden
and less like an honor? [music]
And do you ever miss the sort of quiet
joy of discovery?
>> Yes, I miss the quiet joy of discovery.
I I'd be I'd be lying if I didn't admit
that.
>> [music]
>> But, these are kind of the cards I've
been dealt in my career, and so I try to
embrace it. I try to learn [music] from
it. I try to use it as a way to um you
know, to ultimately make sure that
CRISPR [music] is going to benefit as
many people as possible.
>> What began with innovation in a lab has
grown into an entire CRISPR industry.
[music]
Startups, pharmaceutical giants, and now
AI-driven companies all converging on
the next [music] phase in gene editing.
But for many, the biggest concern isn't
failure.
It's success.
Do you ever struggle with unleashing
[music] this power on the world? This
potential to do so much good, but also
it's really scary.
>> I guess I don't tend to think about it
that way. I I tend to think about it in
terms of the opportunities that CRISPR
brings, but I also recognize that
there's a responsibility [music]
to speak out about the potential risk.
At the moment, certainly, I feel very
excited about where it's headed. [music]
The opportunities to treat people that
have rare disease, I think is is here.
Potentially, [music] opportunities to
prevent diseases that affect many of us
in the future is coming.
>> So, is it paradise ahead or Gattaca?
>> Maybe somewhere in the middle, Emily.
You know, hopefully closer to Nirvana.
>> [laughter]
[music]
>> There's this perception [music] of
science as this sort of slow, methodical
process. But, your journey has had so
many dramatic [music] twists and turns.
Who plays you in the movie?
>> I hope it's Kate Winslet.
>> I like that.
I'm a fan.
Is there a movie?
>> I haven't heard of one, but let me know
if you hear otherwise.
>> [music]